Welcome to Mouth Off, a podcast brought to you by Forget Me Not Productions.
My name is Clary Sadler and on today's episode I'm going to be talking about the iPlusMatter project,
which is a heritage lottery funded project conceived by T. Gwynn Special School in Cardiff
and inclusive arts organisation Forget Me Not Productions.
iPlusMatter provided multiple opportunities for meaningful assistive technology experiences.
These were interwoven with the arts and music was used as a motivator to enable individuals
with the most complex physical and cognitive disabilities to share their own history and
celebrate their independent achievements. The project was launched in February 2020 and was
due to conclude in July of that year. We were going to have a training event called iPlusMatter
Festival and it was going to involve professionals in the field of special education and social and
health sectors. It was also going to be a celebration of the achievements of all involved.
The participants would use a range of assistive technology such as eye gaze, switches and touch
monitors in order to help them achieve and independently take part in music and arts sessions.
Due to Covid-19 the project was postponed and we had to adapt the sharing event and the training
event to fit a virtual platform. Pupils at five local special schools, adults from a local day
centre and three individuals all with complex needs took part in assistive technology and
inclusive art sessions called MusicCan. MusicCan is a protocol developed by ForgetMeNot production
and it uses music primarily as a motivator to engage individuals with the most complex needs
in assistive technology. T Gwynn School with the project lead and other partners included
Miceblu Special School, Trinity Fields Special School, Park Lane Special School, Gadliss Day
Centre and three private clients that had all worked with ForgetMeNot productions in the past.
Most of the face-to-face MusicCan sessions had resumed by the end of 2021 but sadly due to ongoing
Covid-19 restrictions Trinity Fields Special School had to pull out. Luckily a Skolhenvelen
Special School stepped in and had the remaining sessions enabling us to wrap up the project.
So what exactly do we mean by assistive technology? Well for the purpose of this project we're using
the term assistive technology to include any specialist technology that enables access to a
computer. So things such as switches, touch monitors, eye gaze which is a computer that is
operated by eye movements and these are linked to specialist software for teaching cause and effect,
choice making and beyond, augmentative and alternative communication or AAC, specialist
controls for wheelchair driving and access to toys and play. So when eye gaze first became
commercially available it was really mostly suited for people who were already at a level of using
AAC and perhaps using AAC with switches, switches being very effective but slow, slow and laborious.
Another focus of iPLASmata has been to provide staff members with the opportunities to be trained
in the implementation of assistive technology systems for those with the most complex disabilities.
Why do you think projects such as this iPLASmata funded by the Heritage Lottery Fund are so important
for the individuals that have been taking part from your school? Well it's the assistive technology
like we did have eye gaze and hearing machines here but they were and they've become older,
they've been broken and they're obsolete. So it's only now that we've started to use the eye gaze
because we've already started your project at Brotson and we're using one pair of the second eye gaze in.
So we're trying to re-establish those and also we want to start training the staff
and really to see what opportunities we can use with the eye gaze. It's wonderful with your project
because you can see how well the children have responded to it and how much you really need that
in our school. What have been the main benefits that you've seen from the individuals that have
taken part in the project? So to see how much they've progressed in the two weeks has been amazing,
I think it's fantastic. When they get to experience technology and staff get to see what they're
capable of by using that technology which gives us input as they're to move forward with purchasing
of our skills and developing those skills and pupils get to be able to be part of a project,
parents can share and see that project and see what the children are working on and I know the
way that our pupils have responded, they've been focused and they've really enjoyed it and I think
music is such a wonderful access around pupils anyway. So it's just a wonderful way for them to
be focused and to be able to get into that niche and they are there. What are the main barriers
for these individuals achieving independently within a school or daycare setting? The challenges
they need more like consistency constantly and you need more technology things to come in for
the children to help them progress higher than they already are. One of the main aims of the
project has been to empower individuals identified as experiencing profound and multiple learning
disabilities or individuals that have complex physical disabilities. These individuals use
assistive technology to experience independent achievement and throughout the project we use the
MusicCan framework to motivate engagement with this technology changing and shifting the focus
from disability to ability. When I started making music with Forget Me Not productions it changed
my life. Music transformed me. We hope to raise awareness also of the historical development of
assistive technologies and the potential impact for independent learning via new technologies
and new techniques. We speak to Mel Sadler about the history of assistive technology.
But of course by far the biggest development for assistive technology particularly for those
individuals with the greatest cognitive impairments has been the development of eye gaze.
So eye gaze worked really well for that group of people straight away but it took some time for
eye gaze to be suited for software to come out and be made available for people with more
significant intellectual impairments as well as their physical disability. But once software such
as Look2Learn and Sensory Eye Effects and some you know some of the inclusive technology
softwares became available for eye gaze users it's really opened up a whole new world for that group
of learners which is just just amazing and you see people making choices using eye gaze
who I would have considered it being very difficult to teach them to make choices using
switches because using switches to make choices is a much higher cognitive load if that makes sense.
Yet they can do it with eye gaze. We also talk to assistive technology guru
Carol Thornett. Dr. Carol Thornett has been involved in the field of assistive technology
since 1986. She was a pioneer in exploring the use of assistive technology with individuals
experiencing profound and multiple learning disabilities. In fact it was Carol that developed
the Thirst Mobility Platform which was originally part of the Spastic Society Research Project
and had the aim of enabling children with cerebral palsy to explore mobility when their peers were
able to. With the mobility we're trying to get children mobile at the same age that their peers
would be mobile since they've extrapolated those with learning difficulties and physical difficulty
obviously as well. But initially it was just a physical disability. That proved to be really
exciting and I think it's quite sad now that I've seen so few with independent mobility.
They should be in their usual seating because that was always such a problem if they went to
a wheelchair service in that what seating would they use. So this was you know that's the reason
why it was a platform that you could attach the whole seating system so that you started by looking
at whether they could control it and what they would do and did they stop and stop as important
The historic Cragher Park School has also been our heritage partner throughout the I plus Matter
sessions. Cragher Park House is a country house in Pentirk, Cardiff. It was built in 1914 for a
colliery owner named Thomas Evans. Evans died in 1943 and Cragher Park then came into the possession
of the National Coal Board before being sold in 1954 to the Spastic Society. They opened a residential
school site in 1955 and the house still operates as a residential care facility today. It is also a
special school for young adults with learning disabilities which is operated by Salutum Healthcare.
The school I work in is catered for people with disabilities. Research the school you're going to
work in and the students you're going to work with and then it's just a case of getting to know your
colleagues and them getting to know you and that should make your job hopefully a lot easier.
That was one of the first things people used to look at and say. Last time probably a student
but that doesn't happen anymore because I'm older and I grow beards and stuff like that so
that does not happen anymore. Well my powered wheelchair it can well the batteries last longer
which means I can stay out for longer I can socialize for longer and be in work for longer
and secondly my power chair then can also so as you can see the chair the chair I'm sitting in
is actually rising which then also helps me in my job professionally when I'm working with students
with standing frames who are in standing frame sorry and also helps me socially when there is
no seating available for other people I can then rise myself up to the level that the person is
standing to and then when I'm when I'm done you just go back down so it's basically far different
now to how it used to be there's no comparison because now I can turn lights on using my voice
whereas when I was younger I wasn't able well I wasn't able to read I wasn't able to really
reach the light switches due to them being on a different level. What would you say
you're most proud of something you've achieved maybe through your use of technology that's helped
you achieve that thing? It could be related to school or it could be games games
and remote control controls. So you're quite the expert when it comes to games and remote control.
Yes I need help trying out accessible instruments I need help accessing music tech and recording
studios. This is what we're doing through us really isn't it I guess remotely in the house
when I started making music with forget me not productions it changed my life music transformed
me I feel like I'm finally using my brain properly join me next time when I interview
Yvonne Kanicki Yvonne is a programmer and curator specializing in black independent film